=============
Documentation
=============
This documentation is generated and published at
`Read the Docs`_ whenever the master branch is updated.

GitHub can render our ``.rst`` documents as ReStructuredText_, which is
close enough to Sphinx_ for most code reviews, without features like links
between documents.

It is occasionally necessary to generate the documentation locally. It is
easiest to do this with a virtualenv_ on the host system, using Docker only to
regenerate the MDN Sphinx template.  If you are not comfortable with that style
of development, it can be done entirely in Docker using ``docker-compose``.

.. _`Read the Docs`: https://kuma.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
.. _ReStructuredText: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText
.. _Sphinx: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sphinx_(documentation_generator)
.. _virtualenv: https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/stable/

Generating Documentation
------------------------
Sphinx uses a ``Makefile`` in the ``docs`` subfolder to build documentation in
several formats.  MDN only uses the HTML format, and the generated document
index is at ``docs/_build/html/index.html``.

To generate the documentation in a virtualenv on the host machine, first
install the requirements::

    pip install -r requirements/docs.txt

Then switch to the ``docs`` folder to use the ``Makefile``::

    cd docs
    make html
    python -m webbrowser file://${PWD}/_build/html/index.html


To generate the documentation with Docker::

    docker-compose run --rm --user $(id -u) web sh -c "\
      virtualenv /tmp/.venvs/docs && \
      . /tmp/.venvs/docs/bin/activate && \
      pip install -r /app/requirements/docs.txt && \
      cd /app/docs && \
      make html"
    python -m webbrowser file://${PWD}/docs/_build/html/index.html

A ``virtualenv`` is required, to avoid a ``pip`` bug when changing the version
of a system-installed package.

Using the MDN Sphinx Theme project
----------------------------------
The documentation uses a Sphinx theme generated from the MDN templates, hosted
at https://github.com/mdn/sphinx-theme.  This theme is used by MDN and some
other groups at Mozilla. If you are going to update the theme, you should
switch from the published version specified in ``docs.txt`` to a local working
copy.

When working with a virtualenv on the host machine, the ``sphinx-theme``
project can be checked out anywhere, and installed in the virtualenv::

    pip install -e /path/to/sphinx-theme

Now, when the documentation is built, it will use the current theme in the
working copy.

Using Docker, the ``sphinx-theme`` project must be checked out inside the Kuma
repo::

    cd /path/to/kuma
    git clone git@github.com:mdn/sphinx-theme.git

This will make the sphinx-theme available in Docker at the path
``/app/sphinx-theme``. When generating documentation, adjust the command to install
the theme from the working copy::

    docker-compose run --rm --user $(id -u) web sh -c "\
      virtualenv /tmp/.venvs/docs && \
      . /tmp/.venvs/docs/bin/activate && \
      pip install -r /app/requirements/docs.txt && \
      pip install -e /app/sphinx-theme && \
      cd /app/docs && \
      make html"
    python -m webbrowser file://${PWD}/docs/_build/html/index.html

Regenerate the MDN Sphinx Theme template
----------------------------------------
When regenerating the template, the Kuma version should be one deployed to
production.  The assets are loaded from the MDN CDN, and if a non-deployed
Kuma commit is used to generate the template, files will be unavailable, which
will may or may not be obvious when you view the documentation locally.

The MDN Sphinx theme template can be regenerated by Kuma::

    docker-compose run --rm -T \
      -e DEBUG=False \
      -e SITE_URL=https://developer.mozilla.org \
      web \
      /app/manage.py generate_sphinx_template \
      > sphinx-theme/mdn_theme/mdn/layout.html

If you are using a virtualenv on the host system, you will need to modify the
last line to be the path to your working copy.

In either case, you'll want to regenerate the documentation to confirm the new
layout, and use the browser's inspector to look for 404s on static assets.

Publish the new MDN Sphinx Theme
--------------------------------
To use the new theme in the public documentation,

1. Commit the new template to ``sphinx-theme``, open a pull request
2. Remove the clone of the ``sphinx-theme`` from your Kuma repo (Docker method)
3. After review, merge the PR to the master branch of ``sphinx-theme``
4. Tag and publish a new version of ``mdn-sphinx-theme`` to PyPI_
5. Update ``requirements/docs.txt`` in ``kuma``, merge to master

.. _PyPI: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/mdn-sphinx-theme
